Radio Frequency Fingerprint Identification for LoRa
Using Spectrogram and CNN
Guanxiong Shen∗ , Junqing Zhang∗§ , Alan Marshall∗ , Linning Peng† , and Xianbin Wang‡
∗ Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3GJ, United Kingdom

Email: {Guanxiong.Shen, junqing.zhang, alan.marshall}@liverpool.ac.uk
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, No. 2 Sipailou, Nanjing, China

Email: pengln@seu.edu.cn

arXiv:2101.01668v1 [eess.SP] 30 Dec 2020

‡ Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Western University, London, Ontario, N6A 5B9, Canada

Email: xianbin.wang@uwo.ca
§ Corresponding Author
Abstract—Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is
an emerging device authentication technique that relies on intrinsic hardware characteristics of wireless devices. We designed an
RFFI scheme for Long Range (LoRa) systems based on spectrogram and convolutional neural network (CNN). Specifically, we
used spectrogram to represent the fine-grained time-frequency
characteristics of LoRa signals. In addition, we revealed that
the instantaneous carrier frequency offset (CFO) is drifting,
which will result in misclassification and significantly compromise
the system stability; we demonstrated CFO compensation is an
effective mitigation. Finally, we designed a hybrid classifier that
can adjust CNN outputs with the estimated CFO. The mean value
of CFO remains relatively stable, hence it can be used to rule
out CNN predictions whose estimated CFO falls out of the range.
We performed experiments in real wireless environments using
20 LoRa devices under test (DUTs) and a Universal Software
Radio Peripheral (USRP) N210 receiver. By comparing with the
IQ-based and FFT-based RFFI schemes, our spectrogram-based
scheme can reach the best classification accuracy, i.e., 97.61%
for 20 LoRa DUTs.
Index Terms—Internet of Things, LoRa, device authentication,
radio frequency fingerprint, convolutional neural network, carrier frequency offset

I. I NTRODUCTION
The Internet of things (IoT) applications are blooming with
numerous exciting applications such as connected healthcare,
smart cities and intelligent industries [1]. Statista estimated
there would be 75.44 billion IoT devices by 20251 . Device
authentication is critical to safeguard IoT applications for allowing legitimate users to access the network while preventing
malicious users [2]. This task is becoming more challenging
with the rapid growth of low cost IoT devices. Conventional
authentication schemes rely on software addresses such as
Internet Protocol (IP) and/or Media Access Control (MAC)
addresses, which are prone to be tampered or forged [3]. Once
the security credentials are obtained by malicious users, they
can masquerade as the legitimate users to access the private
data or launch fatal attacks on the IoT networks.
Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is a
promising authentication scheme that can identify wireless
1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/471264/iot-number-of-connecteddevices-worldwide/

devices from their emitted transmissions [2], [4], [5]. Radio
frequency fingerprint (RFF) is originated from the hardware
imperfections introduced during the manufacturing process,
which is inherent to the analog front-end components. These
imperfections deviate slightly from their nominal specifications hence do not affect the normal communication functions;
but we can design advanced algorithms to extract them as a
device identifier. Similar to a biometric fingerprint, RFF is
unique and hard to tamper without tremendous efforts.
RFFI consists of two stages, namely training and classification. During the training stage, an authenticator will collect
sufficient wireless packets from devices under test (DUTs),
then extract features from the received packets to train a classifier. Various features are considered in previous work including
Hilbert spectrum [6], carrier frequency offset (CFO) [7]–
[11], inphase and quadrature (IQ) offset [12], spectrum [13],
time-frequency statistics [14], phase error [12], and power
amplifier nonlinearity [15], etc. During the classification stage,
the authenticator will extract the same type of features from
received packets, feed them to the trained classifier and infer
the device identity.
Compared with conventional cryptography-based security
schemes [3], one major advantage of RFFI is that it does
not impose any additional computational burden and power
consumption on the devices to be authenticated [2], [16]. This
is particularly desirable for many IoT applications because
most of the end nodes are low-cost with limited computational
and energy resources. For instance, RFFI could be utilized
in Long Range (LoRa) networks to relieve the severe battery
power constraint of LoRa devices.
RFFI can be considered as a multi-class classification problem, hence the most recent development on deep learning
could be leveraged [17]–[26]. Manually extracting handcrafted
features requires comprehensive knowledge on the adopted
communication technology and protocol. In addition, it is
difficult to estimate each individual feature accurately as the
hardware imperfections are interrelated [27]. Deep learning
algorithms can automatically extract features from the received
signals and can extract more distinguishable and high-level
fingerprints [18]. Deep learning-based RFFI systems are built

with the latest convolutional neural network (CNN) [17]–[25]
or recurrent neural network (RNN) such as long short-term
memory (LSTM) [26]. Most of them often use the IQ samples
as the network input [17]–[21], which may not be the best
solution as the signal characteristics is not explicit in the time
domain. The system performance can be improved by transforming IQ samples and obtaining more distinguishable signal
representations, such as bispectrum [22], [23], differential
constellation trace figure [24], Hilbert-Huang spectrum [25],
error signal [17], etc. During the classification stage, softmax
function is often used in neural networks to return a list
of probabilities with respect to the classes, indicating the
confidence of the predictions. In some cases, the classifier
is not confident about its prediction, i.e, confidence score is
low and the probabilities of several classes are quite close.
However, there is no existing work to leverage this confidence
information to calibrate the uncertain predictions.
As a device authentication scheme, RFFI should remain
stable [2]. Robyns et al. [28] indicated that the accuracy
of their system dropped over time and inferred this was
caused by oscillator frequency drift. However, the authors
did not provide an in-depth analysis or mitigation methods.
Andrews et al. [29] experimentally examined the effect of
temperature variation on different analog components, e.g.
oscillator, power amplifier, phase locked loop, mixer, etc.,
and concluded that the oscillator is particularly sensitive to
temperature fluctuations. While CFO has been successfully
used to identify WiFi devices [10], [11], it was also observed
that low-cost ZigBee devices have severe CFO variations even
within 15 minutes [18], [30]. A comprehensive investigation
of the CFO variation on low cost IoT devices and its effect
on the RFFI is still missing.
In this paper, we take LoRa as a case study to investigate the
above challenges. LoRa is a physical layer standard developed
by Cycleo and patented by Semtech in 2014 [31], which has
been widely used for long range IoT applications. LoRaWAN,
a higher layer protocol for LoRa, relies on cryptography-based
schemes for device registration, namely Over The Air Activation (OTAA) and Activation by Personalization (ABP) [32],
which are prone to be tampered by malicious users. Therefore,
the emerging RFFI technique is promising for LoRa device
authentication. To the best knowledge of the authors, there
are three papers on the LoRa RFFI [26], [28], [33]. LoRa
employes chirp spread spectrum (CSS) modulation which
exhibits time-frequency characteristics, which can be explicitly
revealed in spectrogram. However, none of them considered
the unique modulation techniques of LoRa, which may not be
able to reach optimal performance. In addition, LoRa devices
are low cost and usually manufactured with cheap components
including oscillators. The effect of CFO variation on the LoRa
RFFI has never been investigated.
This paper designs a CNN-based RFFI system to classify
LoRa devices. We aim to answer three questions: (1) Can
we employ a signal representation that is unique to LoRa
modulation and improve the classification accuracy? (2) How
does the CFO variation affect the RFFI stability and can

we mitigate it? (3) Can we leverage the probabilities of the
softmax output to further enhance the deep learning-based
RFFI? We carried out an in-depth investigation and extensive
experiments that involved 20 LoRa devices as DUTs and a
Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) N210 software
defined radio (SDR) platform as the authenticator to answer
these questions. Our contributions are listed as follows.
We experimentally compare three signal representations
for LoRa signals, namely IQ samples, Fast Fourier
transform (FFT) results and spectrogram. It is found
spectrogram can reach the highest accuracy of 96.44%
while the IQ samples and FFT can reach 83.36% and
87.36%, respectively. In addition to this, the training
time of spectrogram-based model (20 minutes) is much
shorter than that of IQ/FFT-based model (one hour),
which indicates the training cost can be significantly
reduced.
• We experimentally demonstrate that CFO is unstable
and degrades the system performance. We established a
bespoke setup by connecting a LoRa DUT and USRP
with an attenuator to eliminate channel effects. CFO is
found to vary in a short time frame but stays relatively
stable in long terms. CFO compensation is found to be effective in mitigating the performance degradation, which
can improve the classification accuracy from 75.59% to
96.44% for spectrogram CNN-based scheme.
• We design a hybrid classifier based on the softmax output
and CFO to further increase the classification accuracy.
The CNN may be uncertain when some devices have very
similar hardware characteristics and their softmax output
probabilities will be close. As the CFO has long term
stability, we calibrate the output of CNN according to
the estimated CFO. The designed hybrid classifier can
significantly improve the system performance, namely
from 83.36% to 92.01% in the best case for the IQ-based
RFFI.
•

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
briefly introduces the background of LoRa modulation and
spectrogram. Then we present the LoRa receiver operations
in Section III. The design details of the RFFI system and the
CNN architecture are introduced in Section IV and Section V,
respectively. In Section VI, we experimentally demonstrate
CFO drift and its effect on the stability of RFFI, and in
Section VII the performance of the proposed RFFI systems
is thoroughly evaluated in a real wireless environment. The
paper is finally concluded in Section VIII.
II. P RELIMINARY
A. LoRa Modulation Technique
LoRa employs CSS modulation which uses linear chirps for
communications. The linear chirps are also known as linear
frequency modulation (LFM) signals, of which the frequency
increases or decreases linearly with time. The information in
each symbol is encoded to the initial phase of the chirp. A

