Towards Channel-Robust Radio Frequency
Fingerprint Identification Using Contrastive Learning
Jie Ma→ , Junqing Zhang→ , Guanxiong Shen† , Linning Peng† , and Alan Marshall→

→ Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3GJ, United Kingdom
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China

Abstract—Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is
an emerging device authentication technique that is based on
intrinsic hardware impairments. Internet of things (IoT) devices
can be identified and classified based on their wireless signals using
RFFI. Developing a robust RFFI system that can maintain high
classification accuracy across diverse communication scenarios is
a critical challenge. In this paper, we proposed a contrastive
learning-based RFFI approach to establish a channel-robust
system using the spectrogram. Specifically, we leverage contrastive
learning in the training stage, which has been implemented with
data augmentation techniques to mitigate the influence of channels
on RFFI. We carried out extensive experimental evaluations
involving a public dataset and a self-collected dataset, both with
ten LoRa devices. Utilizing these datasets, the performance of
the system has been tested in various channel environments,
including stationary, mobile, line-of-sight (LOS) and non-lineof-sight (NLOS) scenarios. The results demonstrated that our
approach is effective and robust to channel variation, achieving
93% and 82% on static and dynamic channels, respectively.
Index Terms—Contrastive Learning, Radio Frequency Fingerprint Identification, Deep Learning

T

I. I NTRODUCTION

HE increasing use of wireless devices has raised security
concerns regarding device authentication in Internet of
Things (IoT) networks. Conventional authentication methods
rely on cryptographic algorithms combined with software addresses, e.g., media access control (MAC) addresses. However,
cryptographic authentication approaches heavily rely on substantial computational resources, which is not affordable to
low-cost IoT devices [1]. Moreover, software addresses can be
easily tampered with. Therefore, there is a strong need for a
low-complexity and reliable IoT authentication scheme.
Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is an effective and secure method for physical layer identity authentication. It identifies wireless devices by analyzing the unique
distortion of the received waveform caused by the imperfections
of hardware components. The imperfection comes from the
transmitter chain of the wireless device [2], such as mixers,
oscillators, power amplifiers, etc. These components deviate
slightly from their nominal specifications due to the inevitable
manufacturing process variations. It manifests as hardware
imperfections such as IQ imbalance, carrier frequency offset
(CFO), and power amplifier non-linearity [3]–[5]. These hardware impairments slightly impact the wireless signal waveform,
Corresponding author: J. Zhang. (Email: junqing.zhang@liverpool.ac.uk)

but do not affect communication transmission [2]. The RFFI
system extracts unique features from wireless signals emitted
by IoT devices to determine their identities.
Deep learning (DL) has the excellent capability of feature
extraction and classification, which has been widely applied
in RFFI [6]–[8]. It contributes to automatically extracting the
discriminative features from interrelated hardware impairments
and benefits to build a well-performance RFFI system. However, there are several challenges with the RFFI, with one of
the most crucial issues being to develop a system that is robust
to channel variations.
Addressing the effects of channel variations in RFFI is
essential, as wireless devices frequently change locations or
move, causing signals to be influenced by different channels.
The work in [9] extracts the channel-independent spectrogram
by dividing adjacent columns in the spectrogram. This process
eliminates channel interference, enabling the extraction of
device characteristics. However, the algorithm assumes that the
channel does not undergo significant changes over short periods
of time, which may become invalid in certain mobile scenarios.
The work in [10] utilized spectral quotient sequences and
moment-based statistical feature extractor to build a channelagnostic RFFI system. However, only simulation results are
provided and its performance in real environments remains
unknown. Despite several techniques have been proposed to
reduce the impact of channel effects [9]–[12], certain limitations still persist. These challenges motivate further exploration
to address the channel issues in RFFI.
Contrastive learning is a DL method that helps neural
networks learn meaningful representations by comparing the
similarities and differences between samples. Prevalent methods in contrastive learning include SimCLR [13], triplets [14],
InfoNCE [15], etc. The goal of the above methods is to
bring similar samples closer together in the latent space while
pushing dissimilar samples further apart. There are some initial
explorations in applying contrastive learning in RFFI [16], [17].
A scheme that alleviates performance degradation in the crossreceiver scenario has been proposed in [16]. [17] proposed
a noise-tolerant RFFI system by data augmentation and contrastive learning. It considers the impact of different signalto-noise ratios (SNR) on the system but overlooks different
communication scenarios, such as dynamic channel scenarios.
We proposed to employ contrastive learning to mitigate

B. Channel Effect in IQ Samples
The received signal is expressed as
x(t) = h(t) ↑ Fm (s(t)) + n(t),
(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. (a) Time domain signal of the preamble (I branch). (b) Spectrogram
of the preamble. (c) Channel-independent spectrogram of the preamble.

the effects of channel variations. To assess its performance,
we conducted evaluations on two datasets including a public
LoRa dataset [9] and a self-collected LoRa dataset. Both
datasets were gathered from diverse real-world environments,
encompassing both static and mobile channels. The technical
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
We designed a contrastive learning-based RFFI system,
which leverages spectrogram, data augmentation, and contrastive loss to extract device-specific features, making the
system robust to channel variations.
• We created a dataset involving 10 LoRa devices and a
USRP N210 SDR platform. Data collection was performed
in both line-of-sight (LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
mobile scenarios.
• We evaluated the performance of the approach in both
static and dynamic channels using a public LoRa dataset
and a self-collected dataset. The classification accuracy
remains above 93% across all positions in static channels.
Our method is also robust in dynamic channels, and its
accuracy reaches over 82% in mobile scenarios.
•

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the signal model of LoRa in the RFFI system. The
design details of the RFFI system are introduced in Section III. Section IV illustrates the implementation of contrastive
learning-based RFFI system. Section V demonstrates the experimental results and Section VI concludes the paper.

A. LoRa Primer
LoRa is a widely used wireless modulation technique for
long-range IoT applications. It employs chirp spread spectrum
(CSS) technology, and there are several up-chirps at the beginning of each LoRa packet, named preambles. The contents of
the preambles are identical across all packets and are unaffected
by the payload, making it ideal for RFFI.
The LoRa signal’s instantaneous frequency varies continuously over time, and a baseband LoRa preamble is given as
B 2

(0 → t → T ),

where h(t) is the wireless channel impulse response, ↑ represents the convolutional operation, Fm (·) denotes the effect of
the mth DUT’s hardware impairments on the waveform, and
n(t) denotes additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).
In a DL-based RFFI, the channel effect h(t) will change the
data distribution of x(t) both in the training and test stage.
Hence, mitigating the channel effect is essential. However, it
is quite challenging to eliminate the channel effect in the time
domain due to the convolutional process.
C. Spectrogram
IQ signals are typically distorted by wireless channels, while
the frequency-varying nature of LoRa signals makes timefrequency analysis techniques, such as the short-time Fourier
transform (STFT), a common choice for representation [18]–
[20]. After STFT, the time-domain IQ signal, x(t), can be
transformed to X(t, f ), given as
!
"
!
" !
"
!
"
X(t, f ) = S x(t) = S h(t) S Fm (s(t)) + S n(t) , (3)
where S(·) represents STFT operation. We then convert the amplitude of the spectrogram from a linear scale to a logarithmic
scale, which can be expressed as
!
" !
"
!
"
log |X(t, f )| = log |S h(t) S Fm (s(t)) + S n(t) |
(4)
↓ log |S(h(t))| + log |S(Fm (s(t))|.
A spectrogram of the preamble part is exemplified in Fig. 1(b).
As can be observed from (4), the channel effect still exists.
However, it becomes a summation term in the spectrogram,
which is easier to separate. This paper employs contrastive
learning to eliminate the channel effect and improve the robustness of RFFI against channel variations.
III. S YSTEM OVERVIEW
As shown in Fig. 2, our RFFI system consists of M DUT and
a receiver. It involves two stages, namely training and inference.

II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

s(t) = Aej (→ωBt+ω T t )

(2)

(1)

where A, B, T are the amplitude, bandwidth and symbol duration, respectively. Fig. 1(a) shows the time-domain baseband
signal of the preamble (I branch).

A. Training
In the training stage, each DUT emits hundreds of packets,
which are captured by a receiver. The receiver will then create
a training dataset, Dtrain , and train a neural network.
1) Preprocessing: Once the signal is captured by the receiver, it undergoes signal preprocessing, including synchronization, preamble extraction, CFO compensation, and normalization.
• Synchronization identifies the packet’s start to capture the
signal accurately.
• Preamble extraction is designed to capture the preamble
part of the signal. It is beneficial for the system to acquire
the unique inherent characteristics of the device.

DUT 1

DUT 2

𝑥2

𝑥1

…

𝑥𝑀

𝓧𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏

Preproc.

Training
𝓓𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏
Dataset，

Receiver

Data
Aug.

Contrastive
Learning
Neural
Network

Training
Dataset,
𝓓𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏

(a)

DUT M

Signal
Rep.

Preproc.

x

Inference

Receiver

DUT to be
Identified

𝑃෠
DUT
label

Augmented
Signal, 𝑥𝑖

Signal
Rep.

Spec.,
𝑋𝑖
Share
Weight

Signal, 𝑥
Data
Aug.

Augmented
Signal, 𝑥𝑗

Signal
Rep.

Spec.,
𝑋𝑗

RFF,
𝓏𝑖
ℓ𝑖,𝑗
RFF,
𝓏𝑗

Fig. 3. Contrastive learning in RFFI with spectrogram.

(b)

Fig. 2. A contrastive learning-based RFFI system. (a) Training stage. (b)
Inference stage.

CFO compensation is employed to enhance system stability, which mitigates the influence of temperature fluctuations and oscillator frequency drift.
• Normalization prevents the neural network from being
affected by amplitude variations in the received signal.
The preamble part is normalized by dividing its root mean
square (RMS).
Please refer to the work in [18] for a detailed description of
the above algorithms.
2) Contrastive Learning: We incorporate contrastive learning during the training stage to strengthen the system’s ability
to handle channel variation. As will be elaborated in Section IV,
the key components of contrastive learning are data augmentation and contrastive loss. Data augmentation is used to imitate
variations from channels, and contrastive loss is employed to
alleviate the interferences.
The loss function L used in this stage consists of contrastive
loss Lcl and cross-entropy Lce , which can be given as
•

L = Lcl + Lce .

(5)

A channel-robust neural network, i.e., f (·; ω), will be obtained when contrastive learning is completed.
B. Inference
The receiver acquires a packet from the device to be
identified. After preprocessing and signal representation, the
signal will be sent into the neural network f (·; ω). Finally, the
prediction of the signal will be given as
P̂ = f (x; ω),

(6)

where P̂ is a label predicted by the model f for the most likely
transmitter of the input signal.
IV. C ONTRASTIVE L EARNING IN RFFI
A. Overview
As shown in Fig. 3, contrastive learning compares two
augmented signals and brings their feature representation closer
together in the latent space, because the two signals are from the
same class. Specifically, a signal, x, is selected from the training
dataset, and two augmented signals, xi and xj , are generated

by data augmentation. They are converted to spectrograms, Xi
and Xj , via signal representation and then fed into the neural
networks for training. It is worth noting the two neural networks
share the same architecture and weights. The contrastive loss is
then calculated based on the outputs of the two neural networks.
B. Data Augmentation
Data augmentation is pivotal in contrastive learning, as it
enriches training datasets and facilitates the construction of
comparison pairs. In RFFI, the two branches will independently
augment the same signal, creating two augmented versions of
the same example. The stochastic data augmentation module
randomly transforms any given data example, creating different
views of the example. After data augmentation, xi and xj will
be obtained, which we consider as a positive pair.
In the proposed system, both channel and AWGN augmentation are used. For the channel model, the tapped delay line
(TDL) channel has been chosen, which is provided in the
PyPhysim library1 . The multipath effect is modelled using the
exponential power delay profile (PDP), while the Doppler effect
is characterized by the Jakes model. Additionally, the synthetic
AWGN noise generated using Python is incorporated in data
augmentation. Unless otherwise specified, the ranges for RMS
delay spread, Doppler frequency, and SNR are [5, 300] ns, [0, 5]
Hz, and [10, 40] dB, respectively.
The simulation parameters mentioned above are randomized
for each specific LoRa signal. Online data augmentation [6] is
utilized, which applies data augmentation in real-time, typically
during each epoch in training. It contributes to increasing the
training dataset and improving the model’s generalization.
C. Signal Representation
Signal representation determines the network’s input, which
could be time-domain, frequency-domain, or other forms [18].
In our work, we chose spectrogram as the representation, which
was introduced in Section II-C. After signal representation, the
positive pair denoted as Xi and Xj .
D. Neural Network
The neural network extracts the representation features from
the augmented signals. Various architectures such as CNN,
LSTM, transformer, etc, can be used for RFFI. The final layer
typically employs an MLP to project high-dimensional vectors
1 https://pypi.org/project/pyphysim/

1×1
conv, 64

B

𝓏

Dense, 10

Dense, 256

Flatten

E
Dense, 512

3 × 3 conv, 64

Avg. Pooling 2D

3 × 3 conv, 64

3 × 3 conv, 64

3 × 3 conv, 64

3 × 3 conv, 32

3 × 3 conv, 32

3 × 3 conv, 32

3 × 3 conv, 32

𝑋

7 × 7 conv, 32, /2

F

𝑃෠

Corridor

Meeting Room

(a)
10.7 m

into low-dimensional vectors. Reducing the dimension will be
more beneficial for calculating contrastive loss.
Considering that the spectrograms have been chosen to feed
into the network, they can be regarded as 2D images when
sent to the DL models. Therefore, we refer to ResNet, which
is widely applied in computer vision, to design the neural
network in our system. The architecture of the neural network
is shown in Fig. 4, which consists of nine convolutional layers,
one average pooling layer and three dense layers. The first
convolutional layer uses 32 7↔7 kernels. The second to the fifth
layers use 32 3 ↔ 3 kernels, while the sixth to the ninth layers
employ 64 3 ↔ 3 kernels. Three dense layers containing 512,
256 and 10 neurons, respectively. Specifically, the contrastive
loss has been calculated by the outputs of the second dense
layer.
E. NT-Xent Loss Function εi,j
The contrastive loss encourages positive pairs to be close
in the feature space and minimizes the agreement of all
other negative pairs. In this paper, we chose SimCLR [13],
which utilizes the normalized temperature-scaled cross-entropy
(NT-Xent) loss. The neural network learns representations by
maximizing the similarity between differently augmented views
of the signal from the same device via NT-Xent loss.
The loss function is defined to obtain the representative features. Given a set {xk } including a positive pair of examples xi
(Xi ) and xj (Xj ), the contrastive loss helps to identify xj (Xj )
in {xk }k↑=i for a given xi (Xi ). Let sim(u, v) = u↓ v/↗u↗↗v↗
denote the dot product between l2 normalized u and v (i.e.
cosine similarity). Consequently, the loss function for each
positive pair (i, j) is defined as
exp (sim (z i , z j ) /ϑ )

k=1 1[k↑=i] exp (sim (z i , z k ) /ϑ )

Rx

C

D

Fig. 4. Architecture of the neural network.

εi,j = ↘ log #2|B|

Office

A

,

(7)

where 1[k↑=i] ≃ {0, 1} is an indicator function that evaluates to
1 if k ⇐= i, ϑ denotes a temperature parameter (set as 0.05 in
our work), and |B| is batch size. The similarity between RFF
z i and z j will be maximized by (7), and the total loss Lcl is
computed across all positive pairs in a batch B.
V. E XPERIMENTAL E VALUATION

A. Setup
Two datasets were utilized for evaluation, including one
public dataset [9], and another self-collected one.

13.4 m

O1

O2

7.9 m

Lobby

Lecture Room
RX

TX: Mobile

Moving Routine

(b)
Fig. 5. Floor plan of the experimental environment. (a) Public dataset [9]. (b)
Self-collected dataset.

1) Public Dataset: The work in [9] released a public LoRa
RFFI dataset and a subset of the dataset was used in this paper.
Specifically, the DUTs were ten LoPy4 devices and the receiver
was a USRP N210 SDR platform. The floorplan is shown in
Fig. 5(a).
Training dataset: There were 400 LoRa packets for each
device, which were collected in a residential room with LOS
available. The DUT and the receiver was kept close (about half
meter), in order to obtain high SNR data.
Test dataset: There were 200 packets per device. There were
two scenarios, namely static and dynamic channels.
Static channel: Testing datasets D1-D6 were collected at
six different locations, labelled as A-F, respectively. The
DUTs and the USRP N210 remained stationary, with no
moving objects nearby.
• Dynamic channel: There were two cases. (i) Objective
moving: D7 and D8 were collected at Location B and
F, respectively, with the DUTs and USRP kept stationary
while a person walked randomly around the room at a
speed of 2 m/s. (ii) Mobile device: D9 and D10 were
respectively collected in the office and meeting room, with
the USRP remaining stationary as a person walked around
carrying the DUTs at a speed of 2 m/s.
•

Datasets D1, D2, D3, D7, and D9 were collected in an LOS
environment, while D4, D5, D6, D8, and D10 were collected
in an NLOS environment.
2) Self-collected Dataset: We also collected our own
dataset. As shown in Fig. 6(a), five LoPy4 and five mbed 1261
shields were used as DUTs, which are sequentially designated
as DUT1 to DUT10. The receiver end was also a USRP N210
SDR platform, as shown in Fig. 6(b).

100

Lopy4

Accuracy(%)

80

60

40
Spec + CL
CIS
Spec
IQ + CL
IQ

20

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. Experimental devices. (a) DUT: ten LoRa devices. (b) Receiver: USRP
N210 SDR.

Training dataset: There were 800 LoRa packets for each
device. During the collection of the training dataset, the transmitter and the receiver were placed stationary, one meter apart,
with a LOS between them.
Test dataset: Each testing dataset includes 200 packets per
device. We considered a mobile scenario, which is the most
challenging. The receiver was kept stationary while a person
took the DUTs walking along routes O1 and O2 at a speed
of 2 m/s for LOS and NLOS mobile scenarios, respectively.
Fig. 5(b) displays the floor plan of the environment where the
testing datasets were collected.
3) Device Configuration: Both datasets used the same device configurations. The DUTs were configured with bandwidth
B = 125 kHz and carrier frequency fc = 868.1 MHz. The
sampling rate of the receiver end USRP N210 is fs = 1 MHz.
The Communications Toolbox Support Package for USRP
Radio of MATLAB R2021b is used for accessing data from
USRP2 . Eight preambles at the start of each LoRa packet were
captured for RFFI.
4) Training Configuration: The deep learning training was
carried out on a PC equipped with a GPU of NVIDIA GeForce
RTX 4090. PyTorch was used. The neural network parameters
were optimized by the adaptive moment estimation (Adam)
optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.0003 and a batch
size of 32. The validation loss was monitored during training,
and the learning rate was reduced by a factor of 0.5 when the
validation loss did not drop within 10 epochs. Training stopped
when the validation loss did not change within 30 epochs.
B. Benchmark and Metrics
We employed four benchmark algorithms for comparison.
CIS [9]: An effective algorithm to mitigate channel effects
while preserving the device-specific characteristics. The
representation is shown in Fig. 1(c).
• Spec: spectrogram as input and without contrastive learning.
• IQ + CL: IQ samples as input and the neural network
trained with contrastive learning.
• IQ: IQ samples as input and without contrastive learning.
•

2 https://uk.mathworks.com/help/comm/usrpradio.html

0
D1

D2

D3

D4

D5

D6

Evaluation dataset

Fig. 7. Classification results in the static channels. D1-D3 were collected in
LOS scenarios while D4-D6 were collected in NLOS scenarios.
100

100

80

80

60

40
Spec + CL
CIS
Spec
IQ + CL
IQ

20

0

Accuracy(%)

N210

Accuracy(%)

mbed 1261 shield

60

40
Spec + CL
CIS
Spec
IQ + CL
IQ

20

0

D7

D8

D9

D10

Evaluation dataset

(a)

LOS

NLOS

Evaluation dataset

(b)

Fig. 8. Classification results in the dynamic channels. (a) Public dataset. (b)
Self-collected dataset.

For IQ signals, the network architecture is also adapted from
ResNet, as Fig. 4 shows, but the kernel size is adjusted
according to the dimensions of the IQ.
Accuracy is the primary evaluation criterion for the RFFI
system, expressed as
Accuracy =

Number of correctly classified packets
.
Total number of packets

The experiments of all the evaluations were repeated 4 times
and the average accuracy was provided.
C. Results with Static Channels
Fig. 7 shows the classification results in various static channels. Spectrogram with contrastive learning demonstrates the
best performance across all datasets, regardless of whether in a
LOS or NLOS environment. The accuracy of the spectrogram
with contrastive learning remains above 94% in LOS scenarios
and 93% in NLOS scenarios. The performance of IQ is lower
than the spectrogram, even with contrastive learning. It is
related to the fact that channel interference, which presents as
a convolution in the time domain, is more difficult to eliminate
compared to channel effects in the frequency domain.
D. Results with Dynamic Channels
The classification results in dynamic channels using the
public dataset are presented in Fig. 8(a). It can be observed
that the spectrogram with contrastive learning performs best
on all datasets, which indicates the proposed RFFI system
is robust to varying channels. The accuracy on the Dataset

ID EP/Y037197/1 and in part by the UK Royal Society
Research Grants RGS\R1\231435. The work of J. Ma was
also supported by the China Scholarship Council CSC under
Grant ID 202006470007.
R EFERENCES

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9. Confusion matrix of the spectrogram with contrastive learning. (a)
LOS. Overall accuracy: 90.55% (b) NLOS. Overall accuracy: 82.8%.

D9 and D10 is lower than D7 and D8. It suggests that in a
dynamic channel, a moving device will experience a greater
impact on RFF compared to a stationary device. The lower
overall classification accuracy in Fig. 8(a) compared to Fig. 7 is
attributed to the increased multipath and Doppler effects present
in dynamic channels, which make it more difficult to eliminate
the channel effects.
Fig. 8(b) displays the outcomes obtained from our selfcollected dataset under a dynamic channel. The performance
of spectrogram with contrastive learning still outperforms other
methods in both LOS and NLOS scenarios. It outperforms
channel-independent spectrograms and spectrograms by over
3% and 10%, respectively. Even in the challenging NLOS
environments, the accuracy of our approach exceeds 82%.
The confusion matrix of the spectrogram with contrastive
learning under LOS and NLOS is shown in Fig. 9. It can be
observed that the DUTs are more likely to be misclassified
as devices of the same type (DUT 1-5 are LoPy4, 6-10 are
mbed 1261). It could be due to the fact that devices from
the same manufacturer share similar physical features, making
them more difficult to distinguish.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a contrastive learning-based
RFFI system which is robust to channel variation. Specifically,
the system mitigates the impact of the channel with data
augmentation and contrastive learning. We tested our system
on two different datasets, including a public LoRa dataset and
a self-collected dataset. Both datasets include wireless signals
under various channel conditions, such as LOS, NLOS, static,
and mobile scenarios. The results reveal that the contrastive
learning-based RFFI system with spectrogram is robust to
channel variations. Compared with IQ signal, spectrogram, and
channel-independent spectrogram, spectrogram with contrastive
learning shows higher accuracy in both static and dynamic
channels. The performance in NLOS is slightly lower than in
LOS conditions, but the accuracy of our method remains above
82% and is higher than the other methods.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work was supported in part by the UK Engineering
and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) under grant

[1] J. Zhang, G. Li, A. Marshall, A. Hu, and L. Hanzo, “A new frontier for
IoT security emerging from three decades of key generation relying on
wireless channels,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 138 406–138 446, 2020.
[2] J. Zhang, R. Woods, M. Sandell, M. Valkama, A. Marshall, and J. Cavallaro, “Radio frequency fingerprint identification for narrowband systems,
modelling and classification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16,
pp. 3974–3987, 2021.
[3] Y. Li, Y. Ding, J. Zhang, G. Goussetis, and S. K. Podilchak, “Radio
frequency fingerprinting exploiting non-linear memory effect,” IEEE
Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1618–1631, 2022.
[4] S. Hanna, S. Karunaratne, and D. Cabric, “Open set wireless transmitter
authorization: Deep learning approaches and dataset considerations,”
IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 59–72, 2020.
[5] K. Sankhe, M. Belgiovine, F. Zhou, L. Angioloni, F. Restuccia, S. D’Oro,
T. Melodia, S. Ioannidis, and K. Chowdhury, “No radio left behind:
Radio fingerprinting through deep learning of physical-layer hardware
impairments,” IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
165–178, 2019.
[6] G. Shen, J. Zhang, A. Marshall, M. Valkama, and J. Cavallaro, “Towards
length-versatile and noise-robust radio frequency fingerprint identification,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 18, pp. 2355–2367, 2023.
[7] R. Xie, W. Xu, Y. Chen, J. Yu, A. Hu, D. W. K. Ng, and A. L.
Swindlehurst, “A generalizable model-and-data driven approach for openset RFF authentication,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 16, pp.
4435–4450, 2021.
[8] W. Wang and L. Gan, “Radio frequency fingerprinting improved by
statistical noise reduction,” IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 1444–1452, 2022.
[9] G. Shen, J. Zhang, A. Marshall, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Towards scalable
and channel-robust radio frequency fingerprint identification for LoRa,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 17, pp. 774–787, 2022.
[10] J. He, S. Huang, Z. Yang, K. Yu, H. Huan, and Z. Feng, “Channelagnostic radio frequency fingerprint identification using spectral quotient
constellation errors,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 23, no. 1, pp.
158–170, 2023.
[11] Y. Xing, A. Hu, J. Zhang, L. Peng, and X. Wang, “Design of a channel
robust radio frequency fingerprint identification scheme,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 10, no. 8, pp. 6946–6959, 2022.
[12] J. He, S. Huang, Y. Chen, S. Chang, Y. Zhang, and Z. Feng, “Radio
frequency fingerprint identification for ofdm system considering unknown
multipath fading channel,” IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw., 2024.
[13] T. Chen, S. Kornblith, M. Norouzi, and G. Hinton, “A simple framework
for contrastive learning of visual representations,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. (PMLR), 2020, pp. 1597–1607.
[14] F. Schroff, D. Kalenichenko, and J. Philbin, “Facenet: A unified embedding for face recognition and clustering,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Boston, MA, USA, June 2015.
[15] A. v. d. Oord, Y. Li, and O. Vinyals, “Representation learning with
contrastive predictive coding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748, 2018.
[16] X. Zha, T. Li, Z. Qiu, and F. Li, “Cross-receiver radio frequency
fingerprint identification based on contrastive learning and subdomain
adaptation,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 30, pp. 70–74, 2023.
[17] Z. Ren, P. Ren, D. Xu, and T. Zhang, “Noise-tolerant radio frequency
fingerprinting with data augmentation and contrastive learning,” in Proc.
IEEE Wireless Commun. and Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Glasgow, UK, March
2023, pp. 1–6.
[18] G. Shen, J. Zhang, A. Marshall, L. Peng, and X. Wang, “Radio frequency
fingerprint identification for LoRa using deep learning,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 8, pp. 2604–2616, 2021.
[19] M. A. Ben Temim, G. Ferré, B. Laporte-Fauret, D. Dallet, B. Minger, and
L. Fuché, “An enhanced receiver to decode superposed lora-like signals,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 8, pp. 7419–7431, 2020.
[20] C. Li, H. Guo, S. Tong, X. Zeng, Z. Cao, M. Zhang, Q. Yan, L. Xiao,
J. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Nelora: Towards ultra-low snr lora communication
with neural-enhanced demodulation,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Embedded
Netw. Sensor Syst., New York, NY, USA, 2021, p. 56–68.

