Towards Channel-Robust Radio Frequency
Fingerprint Identification Using Contrastive Learning
Jie Ma→ , Junqing Zhang→ , Guanxiong Shen† , Linning Peng† , and Alan Marshall→

→ Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 3GJ, United Kingdom
† School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China

Abstract—Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is
an emerging device authentication technique that is based on
intrinsic hardware impairments. Internet of things (IoT) devices
can be identified and classified based on their wireless signals using
RFFI. Developing a robust RFFI system that can maintain high
classification accuracy across diverse communication scenarios is
a critical challenge. In this paper, we proposed a contrastive
learning-based RFFI approach to establish a channel-robust
system using the spectrogram. Specifically, we leverage contrastive
learning in the training stage, which has been implemented with
data augmentation techniques to mitigate the influence of channels
on RFFI. We carried out extensive experimental evaluations
involving a public dataset and a self-collected dataset, both with
ten LoRa devices. Utilizing these datasets, the performance of
the system has been tested in various channel environments,
including stationary, mobile, line-of-sight (LOS) and non-lineof-sight (NLOS) scenarios. The results demonstrated that our
approach is effective and robust to channel variation, achieving
93% and 82% on static and dynamic channels, respectively.
Index Terms—Contrastive Learning, Radio Frequency Fingerprint Identification, Deep Learning

T

I. I NTRODUCTION

HE increasing use of wireless devices has raised security
concerns regarding device authentication in Internet of
Things (IoT) networks. Conventional authentication methods
rely on cryptographic algorithms combined with software addresses, e.g., media access control (MAC) addresses. However,
cryptographic authentication approaches heavily rely on substantial computational resources, which is not affordable to
low-cost IoT devices [1]. Moreover, software addresses can be
easily tampered with. Therefore, there is a strong need for a
low-complexity and reliable IoT authentication scheme.
Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is an effective and secure method for physical layer identity authentication. It identifies wireless devices by analyzing the unique
distortion of the received waveform caused by the imperfections
of hardware components. The imperfection comes from the
transmitter chain of the wireless device [2], such as mixers,
oscillators, power amplifiers, etc. These components deviate
slightly from their nominal specifications due to the inevitable
manufacturing process variations. It manifests as hardware
imperfections such as IQ imbalance, carrier frequency offset
(CFO), and power amplifier non-linearity [3]–[5]. These hardware impairments slightly impact the wireless signal waveform,
Corresponding author: J. Zhang. (Email: junqing.zhang@liverpool.ac.uk)

but do not affect communication transmission [2]. The RFFI
system extracts unique features from wireless signals emitted
by IoT devices to determine their identities.
Deep learning (DL) has the excellent capability of feature
extraction and classification, which has been widely applied
in RFFI [6]–[8]. It contributes to automatically extracting the
discriminative features from interrelated hardware impairments
and benefits to build a well-performance RFFI system. However, there are several challenges with the RFFI, with one of
the most crucial issues being to develop a system that is robust
to channel variations.
Addressing the effects of channel variations in RFFI is
essential, as wireless devices frequently change locations or
move, causing signals to be influenced by different channels.
The work in [9] extracts the channel-independent spectrogram
by dividing adjacent columns in the spectrogram. This process
eliminates channel interference, enabling the extraction of
device characteristics. However, the algorithm assumes that the
channel does not undergo significant changes over short periods
of time, which may become invalid in certain mobile scenarios.
The work in [10] utilized spectral quotient sequences and
moment-based statistical feature extractor to build a channelagnostic RFFI system. However, only simulation results are
provided and its performance in real environments remains
unknown. Despite several techniques have been proposed to
reduce the impact of channel effects [9]–[12], certain limitations still persist. These challenges motivate further exploration
to address the channel issues in RFFI.
Contrastive learning is a DL method that helps neural
networks learn meaningful representations by comparing the
similarities and differences between samples. Prevalent methods in contrastive learning include SimCLR [13], triplets [14],
InfoNCE [15], etc. The goal of the above methods is to
bring similar samples closer together in the latent space while
pushing dissimilar samples further apart. There are some initial
explorations in applying contrastive learning in RFFI [16], [17].
A scheme that alleviates performance degradation in the crossreceiver scenario has been proposed in [16]. [17] proposed
a noise-tolerant RFFI system by data augmentation and contrastive learning. It considers the impact of different signalto-noise ratios (SNR) on the system but overlooks different
communication scenarios, such as dynamic channel scenarios.
We proposed to employ contrastive learning to mitigate

B. Channel Effect in IQ Samples
The received signal is expressed as
x(t) = h(t) ↑ Fm (s(t)) + n(t),
(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. (a) Time domain signal of the preamble (I branch). (b) Spectrogram
of the preamble. (c) Channel-independent spectrogram of the preamble.

the effects of channel variations. To assess its performance,
we conducted evaluations on two datasets including a public
LoRa dataset [9] and a self-collected LoRa dataset. Both
datasets were gathered from diverse real-world environments,
encompassing both static and mobile channels. The technical
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows.
We designed a contrastive learning-based RFFI system,
which leverages spectrogram, data augmentation, and contrastive loss to extract device-specific features, making the
system robust to channel variations.
• We created a dataset involving 10 LoRa devices and a
USRP N210 SDR platform. Data collection was performed
in both line-of-sight (LOS) and non-line-of-sight (NLOS)
mobile scenarios.
• We evaluated the performance of the approach in both
static and dynamic channels using a public LoRa dataset
and a self-collected dataset. The classification accuracy
remains above 93% across all positions in static channels.
Our method is also robust in dynamic channels, and its
accuracy reaches over 82% in mobile scenarios.
•

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the signal model of LoRa in the RFFI system. The
design details of the RFFI system are introduced in Section III. Section IV illustrates the implementation of contrastive
learning-based RFFI system. Section V demonstrates the experimental results and Section VI concludes the paper.

A. LoRa Primer
LoRa is a widely used wireless modulation technique for
long-range IoT applications. It employs chirp spread spectrum
(CSS) technology, and there are several up-chirps at the beginning of each LoRa packet, named preambles. The contents of
the preambles are identical across all packets and are unaffected
by the payload, making it ideal for RFFI.
The LoRa signal’s instantaneous frequency varies continuously over time, and a baseband LoRa preamble is given as
B 2

(0 → t → T ),

where h(t) is the wireless channel impulse response, ↑ represents the convolutional operation, Fm (·) denotes the effect of
the mth DUT’s hardware impairments on the waveform, and
n(t) denotes additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).
In a DL-based RFFI, the channel effect h(t) will change the
data distribution of x(t) both in the training and test stage.
Hence, mitigating the channel effect is essential. However, it
is quite challenging to eliminate the channel effect in the time
domain due to the convolutional process.
C. Spectrogram
IQ signals are typically distorted by wireless channels, while
the frequency-varying nature of LoRa signals makes timefrequency analysis techniques, such as the short-time Fourier
transform (STFT), a common choice for representation [18]–
[20]. After STFT, the time-domain IQ signal, x(t), can be
transformed to X(t, f ), given as
!
"
!
" !
"
!
"
X(t, f ) = S x(t) = S h(t) S Fm (s(t)) + S n(t) , (3)
where S(·) represents STFT operation. We then convert the amplitude of the spectrogram from a linear scale to a logarithmic
scale, which can be expressed as
!
" !
"
!
"
log |X(t, f )| = log |S h(t) S Fm (s(t)) + S n(t) |
(4)
↓ log |S(h(t))| + log |S(Fm (s(t))|.
A spectrogram of the preamble part is exemplified in Fig. 1(b).
As can be observed from (4), the channel effect still exists.
However, it becomes a summation term in the spectrogram,
which is easier to separate. This paper employs contrastive
learning to eliminate the channel effect and improve the robustness of RFFI against channel variations.
III. S YSTEM OVERVIEW
As shown in Fig. 2, our RFFI system consists of M DUT and
a receiver. It involves two stages, namely training and inference.

II. P ROBLEM S TATEMENT

s(t) = Aej (→ωBt+ω T t )

(2)

(1)

where A, B, T are the amplitude, bandwidth and symbol duration, respectively. Fig. 1(a) shows the time-domain baseband
signal of the preamble (I branch).

A. Training
In the training stage, each DUT emits hundreds of packets,
which are captured by a receiver. The receiver will then create
a training dataset, Dtrain , and train a neural network.
1) Preprocessing: Once the signal is captured by the receiver, it undergoes signal preprocessing, including synchronization, preamble extraction, CFO compensation, and normalization.
• Synchronization identifies the packet’s start to capture the
signal accurately.
• Preamble extraction is designed to capture the preamble
part of the signal. It is beneficial for the system to acquire
the unique inherent characteristics of the device.

