1

Towards Scalable and Channel-Robust Radio
Frequency Fingerprint Identification for LoRa

arXiv:2107.02867v1 [eess.SP] 6 Jul 2021

Guanxiong Shen, Junqing Zhang, Alan Marshall, Senior Member, IEEE, and Joseph Cavallaro, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI)
is a promising device authentication technique based on the
transmitter hardware impairments. In this paper, we propose a
scalable and robust RFFI framework achieved by deep learning
powered radio frequency fingerprint (RFF) extractor. Specifically,
we leverage the deep metric learning to train an RFF extractor,
which has excellent generalization ability and can extract RFFs
from previously unseen devices. Any devices can be enrolled
via the pre-trained RFF extractor and the RFF database can
be maintained efficiently for allowing devices to join and leave.
Wireless channel impacts the RFF extraction and is tackled by
exploiting channel independent feature and data augmentation.
We carried out extensive experimental evaluation involving 60
commercial off-the-shelf LoRa devices and a USRP N210 software defined radio platform. The results have successfully demonstrated that our framework can achieve excellent generalization
abilities for device classification and rogue device detection as
well as effective channel mitigation.
Index Terms—Internet of things, device authentication, radio
frequency fingerprint identification, deep learning, LoRa

I. I NTRODUCTION
With the rapid growth in the population of the Internet of
things (IoT) devices, their security is becoming increasingly
important. Device authentication is required to prevent the
intrusion of rogue devices that may execute harmful processes
or access to private data [1]. It is usually achieved by cryptographic schemes such as the common challenge-responsebased protocols. These schemes require a common key preshared which may be difficult for IoT devices because they are
usually low-cost and power constrained [2]. They also rely on
software addresses such as MAC address, which can however
be tampered with easily.
Lightweight and reliable device authentication is thus urgently required for ensuring IoT security. Radio frequency fingerprint identification (RFFI) is a promising non-cryptographic
technique that relies on the device intrinsic hardware impairments of radio frequency (RF) components generated during
Manuscript received xxx; revised xxx; accepted xxx. Date of publication
xxx; date of current version xxx. The work was in part supported by
UK Royal Society Research Grants under grant ID RGS/R1/191241 and
National Key Research and Development Program of China under grant
ID 2020YFE0200600. The review of this paper was coordinated by xxx.
(Corresponding author: Junqing Zhang.)
G. Shen, J. Zhang and A. Marshall are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Electronics, University of Liverpool, Liverpool,
L69 3GJ, United Kingdom. (email: Guanxiong.Shen@liverpool.ac.uk; junqing.zhang@liverpool.ac.uk; alan.marshall@liverpool.ac.uk)
J. Cavallaro is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rice University, Houston, USA. (email: cavallar@rice.edu)
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier xxx

the manufacturing process. The hardware characteristics of
these components slightly deviate from their nominal values
but the deviation is so small that the normal communication
functionality is not affected. These hardware features are
unique and difficult to be tampered with, thus they can be
treated as the fingerprint of IoT devices, in a similar manner as
the biometrics of human beings. The transmitter hardware impairments will distort the transmission waveform, from which
the receiver can infer the transmitter identity by extracting
the device-specific radio frequency fingerprints (RFFs). RFFI
can thus identify transmitters on a per-packet basis. All the
RFFI operations are completed at the receiver and there is
no modification of the transmitter. Hence, it is particularly
suitable for power-constrained and low-cost IoT devices.
The existing RFFI work can be categorized into traditional
RFF extractor-based and deep learning-based approaches. The
former relies on the manually designed RFF extractor to obtain
hardware features such as IQ imbalance [3], [4], CFO [4]–[9],
signal transient part [10], [11], power spectral density [12],
[13], power amplifier non-linearity [14], beam pattern [15], etc.
However, such schemes are highly dependent on the quality
of the designed feature extraction algorithms and require a
deep understanding on the adopted communication protocol.
Some hardware characteristics are interrelated with each other,
making it challenging to extract each feature individually.
On the other hand, deep learning-based approaches usually
rely on a classification neural network to process raw signals
and directly infer device identity without the need of feature
engineering, which has attracted wide attention in recent
years [16]–[35].
While deep learning-based RFFI has excellent classification
accuracy, it suffers from the limited scalability and channel
robustness issues, as shown in Fig. 1. The number of neurons
of the softmax layer in deep learning-based RFFI systems
is unchangeable after training, which restricts the RFFI to a
close-set problem. Hence, the scalability of such design is limited as only a fixed number of devices can be identified [36],
[37], which raises two concerns:
The deep learning model needs to be re-trained whenever
legitimate devices join and leave the IoT network, which
is time-consuming.
• Rogue devices cannot be predicted and their data is usually not available for training. During the classification,
they will be classified as the legitimate devices with the
most similar characteristics in the training categories [20],
[22], [29], which is not acceptable.
•

Moreover, all the RFFI systems are subject to channel effects

2

Training devices

Rogue device

This packet is
sent from Dev 1

……

Data
Augmentation
Preprocessing

Training

Train RFF
Extractor
Channel independent
spectrogram

Legitimate devices

Dev 1

RFFI system

Dev 2
Device moving
Dev 3

(channel changes)

Preprocessing

……
Devices to be
identified

Preprocessing

……

Fig. 1: IoT networks secured by RFFI. Deep learning-based
RFFI systems suffer from limited scalability and channel
robustness.

as the received signal is not only distorted by hardware
impairments but also the wireless channel.
In our prior work, we explored the selection of signal representation (IQ samples, FFT coeefficients and spectrogram),
stability, and deep learning models for RFFI systems [38].
However, the above mentioned challenges, i.e., the scalability
and channel robustness, are not well addressed. This paper
aims to design a scalable and channel-agnostic RFFI system.
To achieve this, our approach introduces an enrollment stage
and uses k-nearest neighbor (k-NN) to replace the softmax
layer for recognition. The channel independent spectrogram
is also constructed to mitigate channel effects. Extensive
experiments were carried out with 60 commercial off-the-shelf
LoRa devices of four models at various channel conditions to
demonstrate the excellent performance of the proposed RFFI
system. Our contributions are highlighted as follows.
We design a scalable RFFI framework based on a deep
metric learning-powered RFF extractor, which enables
device joining and leaving without the need for retraining. It maintains an RFF database by enrolling a new
device using the pre-trained RFF extractor or deleting the
record of a leaving device.
• We propose a channel robust RFFI protocol by constructing the channel independent spectrogram and exploiting
data augmentation. The channel independent spectrogram
can mitigate the channel effect in the time-frequency
domain while reserving the RFF of the LoRa signal. The
data augmentation is carefully designed to represent real
channel conditions with both multipath and Doppler shift.
• We conduct extensive experiments involving different
LoRa devices, various channel conditions and antenna
polarization. We experimentally demonstrate that the RFF
extractor is able to extract features from devices that
are not present during training, even they are from
other manufacturers. The proposed channel independent
spectrogram is shown to be effective in mitigating the
channel effect and data augmentation can further increase
the system robustness. Antenna polarization is found to
affect the classification performance.

•

This paper provides a general RFFI framework and studies
LoRa as an example. LoRa devices are manufactured with

Enrollment

Identification

RFF Extractor

RFF Database

Channel independent
spectrogram

RFF Extractor
Channel independent
spectrogram

Rogue Device
Detection
Device
Classification

Fig. 2: System diagram of the proposed RFFI system.
low-cost components therefore have abundant hardware impairments, which are suitable for RFFI. Moreover, the commercial LoRaWAN specification defines cryptography-based
device authentication schemes. The root keys are assigned
to the end-nodes during fabrication and secure storage of
them is a huge challenge. The proposed RFFI can provide an
alternative method to identify and authenticate LoRa devices.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
shows the system overview. Section III introduces the LoRa
signal processing. Section IV presents the procedure of constructing the channel independent spectrogram. The training of
RFF extractor is introduced in Section V while the enrollment
and identification of RFFI systems is introduced in Section VI.
Section VII provides extensive evaluation results to show the
system performance. Section VIII and Section IX introduces
related work and concludes the paper, respectively.
II. S YSTEM OVERVIEW
The proposed system is based the deep learning-powered
RFF extractor. As shown in Fig. 2, it involves training,
enrollment and identification stages.
Training: The training stage will leverage the outstanding
feature extraction capability of deep learning to generate an
RFF extractor rather than a classification neural network.
Specifically, a large number of training packets are collected
from numerous training devices. The data augmentation is
used to increase channel diversity. The training samples are
then transformed to channel independent spectrograms to
mitigate channel effects. Finally, we leverage the triplet loss
in deep metric learning to train the extractor. The input of the
RFF extractor is a 2-D channel independent spectrogram, and
the output is a vector consists of 512 elements, which is the
unique RFF of that device.
The training only needs to be done once as the trained RFF
extractor is able to extract unique RFFs from out-of-library
(unseen) devices. The training devices are not necessarily the
same as the ones for enrollment and identification. The training
can be done by a third party that owns massive data collected
from a huge number of devices to train an RFF extractor with
excellent generalization capability.
Enrollment: The enrollment will obtain the RFFs of legitimate devices using the RFF extractor. These are the actual
working devices in an IoT network, which are probably

