Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

T ENT: F ULLY T EST-T IME A DAPTATION
BY E NTROPY M INIMIZATION
Dequan Wang1∗, Evan Shelhamer2∗† , Shaoteng Liu1 , Bruno Olshausen1 , Trevor Darrell1
dqwang@cs.berkeley.edu, shelhamer@google.com
UC Berkeley1
Adobe Research2

A BSTRACT
A model must adapt itself to generalize to new and different data during testing.
In this setting of fully test-time adaptation the model has only the test data and its
own parameters. We propose to adapt by test entropy minimization (tent1 ): we
optimize the model for confidence as measured by the entropy of its predictions.
Our method estimates normalization statistics and optimizes channel-wise affine
transformations to update online on each batch. Tent reduces generalization error
for image classification on corrupted ImageNet and CIFAR-10/100 and reaches a
new state-of-the-art error on ImageNet-C. Tent handles source-free domain adaptation on digit recognition from SVHN to MNIST/MNIST-M/USPS, on semantic
segmentation from GTA to Cityscapes, and on the VisDA-C benchmark. These
results are achieved in one epoch of test-time optimization without altering training.

1

I NTRODUCTION

Deep networks can achieve high accuracy on training and testing data from the same distribution,
as evidenced by tremendous benchmark progress (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Simonyan & Zisserman,
2015; He et al., 2016). However, generalization to new and different data is limited (Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2019; Recht et al., 2019; Geirhos et al., 2018). Accuracy suffers when the training (source)
data differ from the testing (target) data, a condition known as dataset shift (Quionero-Candela et al.,
2009). Models can be sensitive to shifts during testing that were not known during training, whether
natural variations or corruptions, such as unexpected weather or sensor degradation. Nevertheless, it
can be necessary to deploy a model on different data distributions, so adaptation is needed.
During testing, the model must adapt given only its parameters and the target data. This fully test-time
adaptation setting cannot rely on source data or supervision. Neither is practical when the model
first encounters new testing data, before it can be collected and annotated, as inference must go on.
Real-world usage motivates fully test-time adaptation by data, computation, and task needs:
1. Availability. A model might be distributed without source data for bandwidth, privacy, or profit.
2. Efficiency. It might not be computationally practical to (re-)process source data during testing.
3. Accuracy. A model might be too inaccurate without adaptation to serve its purpose.
To adapt during testing we minimize the entropy of model predictions. We call this objective the
test entropy and name our method tent after it. We choose entropy for its connections to error and
shift. Entropy is related to error, as more confident predictions are all-in-all more correct (Figure 1).
Entropy is related to shifts due to corruption, as more corruption results in more entropy, with a strong
rank correlation to the loss for image classification as the level of corruption increases (Figure 2).
To minimize entropy, tent normalizes and transforms inference on target data by estimating statistics
and optimizing affine parameters batch-by-batch. This choice of low-dimensional, channel-wise
feature modulation is efficient to adapt during testing, even for online updates. Tent does not restrict
or alter model training: it is independent of the source data given the model parameters. If the model
can be run, it can be adapted. Most importantly, tent effectively reduces not just entropy but error.
∗
1

Equal contribution. † Work done at Adobe Research; the author is now at DeepMind.
Please see the project page at https://github.com/DequanWang/tent for the code and more.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2021

80

1.0

60

0.8

Loss

Error (%)

1.2

40

0.6

original
noise
blur
digital
weather
level

0.4

20

= 0.61

0.2

0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0

0.2

Entropy

Figure 1: Predictions with lower entropy have
lower error rates on corrupted CIFAR-100-C.
Certainty can serve as supervision during testing.

0.3

0.4

Entropy

0.5

0.6

Figure 2: More corruption causes more loss and
entropy on CIFAR-100-C. Entropy can estimate
the degree of shift without training data or labels.

Our results evaluate generalization to corruptions for image classification, to domain shift for digit
recognition, and to simulation-to-real shift for semantic segmentation. For context with more data
and optimization, we evaluate methods for robust training, domain adaptation, and self-supervised
learning given the labeled source data. Tent can achieve less error given only the target data, and it
improves on the state-of-the-art for the ImageNet-C benchmark. Analysis experiments support our
entropy objective, check sensitivity to the amount of data and the choice of parameters for adaptation,
and back the generality of tent across architectures.
Our contributions
• We highlight the setting of fully test-time adaptation with only target data and no source data. To
emphasize practical adaptation during inference we benchmark with offline and online updates.
• We examine entropy as an adaptation objective and propose tent: a test-time entropy minimization
scheme to reduce generalization error by reducing the entropy of model predictions on test data.
• For robustness to corruptions, tent reaches 44.0% error on ImageNet-C, better than the state-ofthe-art for robust training (50.2%) and the strong baseline of test-time normalization (49.9%).
• For domain adaptation, tent is capable of online and source-free adaptation for digit classification
and semantic segmentation, and can even rival methods that use source data and more optimization.

2

S ETTING : F ULLY T EST-T IME A DAPTATION

Adaptation addresses generalization from source to target. A model fθ (x) with parameters θ trained
on source data and labels xs , y s may not generalize when tested on shifted target data xt . Table 1
summarizes adaptation settings, their required data, and types of losses. Our fully test-time adaptation
setting uniquely requires only the model fθ and unlabeled target data xt for adaptation during
inference.
Existing adaptation settings extend training given more data and supervision. Transfer learning
by fine-tuning (Donahue et al., 2014; Yosinski et al., 2014) needs target labels to (re-)train with a
supervised loss L(xt , y t ). Without target labels, our setting denies this supervised training. Domain
adaptation (DA) (Quionero-Candela et al., 2009; Saenko et al., 2010; Ganin & Lempitsky, 2015;
Tzeng et al., 2015) needs both the source and target data to train with a cross-domain loss L(xs , xt ).
Test-time training (TTT) (Sun et al., 2019b) adapts during testing but first alters training to jointly
optimize its supervised loss L(xs , y s ) and self-supervised loss L(xs ). Without source, our setting
denies joint training across domains (DA) or losses (TTT). Existing settings have their purposes, but
do not cover all practical cases when source, target, or supervision are not simultaneously available.
Unexpected target data during testing requires test-time adaptation. TTT and our setting adapt
the model by optimizing an unsupervised loss during testing L(xt ). During training, TTT jointly
optimizes this same loss on source data L(xs ) with a supervised loss L(xs , y s ), to ensure the
parameters θ are shared across losses for compatibility with adaptation by L(xt ). Fully test-time
adaptation is independent of the training data and training loss given the parameters θ. By not
changing training, our setting has the potential to require less data and computation for adaptation.
2

