Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

TTN: A D OMAIN -S HIFT AWARE BATCH N ORMALIZA TION IN T EST-T IME A DAPTATION
Hyesu Lim1,2∗, Byeonggeun Kim∗ , Jaegul Choo2 , Sungha Choi1‡
1
Qualcomm AI Research† , 2 KAIST

arXiv:2302.05155v2 [cs.CV] 18 Feb 2023

A BSTRACT
This paper proposes a novel batch normalization strategy for test-time adaptation.
Recent test-time adaptation methods heavily rely on the modified batch normalization, i.e., transductive batch normalization (TBN), which calculates the mean
and the variance from the current test batch rather than using the running mean and
variance obtained from source data, i.e., conventional batch normalization (CBN).
Adopting TBN that employs test batch statistics mitigates the performance degradation caused by the domain shift. However, re-estimating normalization statistics
using test data depends on impractical assumptions that a test batch should be large
enough and be drawn from i.i.d. stream, and we observed that the previous methods with TBN show critical performance drop without the assumptions. In this
paper, we identify that CBN and TBN are in a trade-off relationship and present
a new test-time normalization (TTN) method that interpolates the standardization
statistics by adjusting the importance between CBN and TBN according to the
domain-shift sensitivity of each BN layer. Our proposed TTN improves model
robustness to shifted domains across a wide range of batch sizes and in various
realistic evaluation scenarios. TTN is widely applicable to other test-time adaptation methods that rely on updating model parameters via backpropagation. We
demonstrate that adopting TTN further improves their performance and achieves
state-of-the-art performance in various standard benchmarks.

1

I NTRODUCTION

When we deploy deep neural networks (DNNs) trained on the source domain into test environments
(i.e., target domains), the model performance on the target domain deteriorates due to the domain
shift from the source domain. For instance, in autonomous driving, a well-trained DNNs model
may exhibit significant performance degradation at test time due to environmental changes, such as
camera sensors, weather, and region (Choi et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022; Kim et al., 2022b).
Test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged to tackle the distribution shift between source and target
domains during test time (Sun et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). Recent TTA approaches (Wang
et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021) address this issue by 1) (re-)estimating normalization statistics from current test input and 2) optimizing model parameters in unsupervised manner,
such as entropy minimization (Grandvalet & Bengio, 2004; Long et al., 2016; Vu et al., 2019) and
self-supervised losses (Sun et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021). In particular, the former focused on the
weakness of conventional batch normalization (CBN) (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015) for domain shift in
a test time. As described in Fig. 1(b), when standardizing target feature activations using source
statistics, which are collected from the training data, the activations can be transformed into an unintended feature space, resulting in misclassification. To this end, the TTA approaches (Wang et al.,
2020; Choi et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022) have heavily depended on the direct use of test batch
statistics to fix such an invalid transformation in BN layers, called transductive BN (TBN) (Nado
et al., 2020; Schneider et al., 2020; Bronskill et al., 2020) (see Fig. 1(c)).
The approaches utilizing TBN showed promising results but have mainly been assessed in limited
evaluation settings (Wang et al., 2020; Choi et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2021). For instance, such evaluation settings assume large test batch sizes (e.g., 200 or more) and a single stationary distribution shift
∗
†

Work completed while at Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. ‡ Corresponding author.
Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2023

Standardize ● Source features

Error rate (%)

(a) Valid output using CBN

⨯ Test features ● Class A ● Class B

(b) Invalid output using CBN

100
80
60
40
20
0

Test batch size

CBN

TBN

TTN(Ours)
Ours

Source mean

Test mean

(c) Valid output using TBN

200

64

TENT TENT+TTN(Ours)
TENT+Ours

SWR

16

4

2

1

SWR+TTN(Ours)
SWR+Ours

(d) Performance drops in small test batches using TBN

Figure 1: Trade-off between CBN & TBN. In conceptual illustrations (a), (b), and (c), the depicted
standardization only considers making the feature distribution have a zero mean, disregarding making it have unit variance. When the source and test distributions are different, and the test batch size
is large, (b) test features can be wrongly standardized when using CBN (Ioffe & Szegedy, 2015),
but (c) TBN (Nado et al., 2020) can provide a valid output. (d) Error rates (↓) on shifted domains
(CIFAR-10-C). TBN and TBN applied (TENT (Wang et al., 2020), SWR (Choi et al., 2022)) methods suffer from severe performance drop when the batch size becomes small, while TTN (Ours)
improves overall performance.
(i.e., single corruption). Recent studies suggest more practical evaluation scenarios based on small
batch sizes (Mirza et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2021; Khurana et al., 2021) or continuously changing data
distribution during test time (Wang et al., 2022). We show that the performance of existing methods
significantly drops once their impractical assumptions of the evaluation settings are violated. For
example, as shown in Fig. 1(d), TBN (Nado et al., 2020) and TBN applied methods suffer from
severe performance drop when the test batch size becomes small, while CBN is irrelevant to the test
batch sizes. We identify that CBN and TBN are in a trade-off relationship (Fig. 1), in the sense that
one of each shows its strength when the other falls apart.
To tackle this problem, we present a novel test-time normalization (TTN) strategy that controls the
trade-off between CBN and TBN by adjusting the importance of source and test batch statistics
according to the domain-shift sensitivity of each BN layer. Intuitively, we linearly interpolate between CBN and TBN so that TBN has a larger weight than CBN if the standardization needs to be
adapted toward the test data. We optimize the interpolating weight after the pre-training but before
the test time, which we refer to as the post-training phase. Specifically, given a pre-trained model,
we first estimate channel-wise sensitivity of the affine parameters in BN layers to domain shift by
analyzing the gradients from the back-propagation of two input images, clean input and its augmented one (simulating unseen distribution). Afterward, we optimize the interpolating weight using
the channel-wise sensitivity replacing BN with the TTN layers. It is noteworthy that none of the
pre-trained model weights are modified, but we only train newly added interpolating weight.
We empirically show that TTN outperforms existing TTA methods in realistic evaluation settings,
i.e., with a wide range of test batch sizes for single, mixed, and continuously changing domain
adaptation through extensive experiments on image classification and semantic segmentation tasks.
TTN as a stand-alone method shows compatible results with the state-of-the-art methods and combining our TTN with the baselines even boosts their performance in overall scenarios. Moreover,
TTN applied methods flexibly adapt to new target domains while sufficiently preserving the source
knowledge. No action other than computing per batch statistics (which can be done simultaneously
to the inference) is needed in test-time; TTN is compatible with other TTA methods without requiring additional computation cost.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel domain-shift aware test-time normalization (TTN) layer that combines
source and test batch statistics using channel-wise interpolating weights considering the
sensitivity to domain shift in order to flexibly adapt to new target domains while preserving
the well-trained source knowledge.
2

