A Discriminative Feature Learning Approach
for Deep Face Recognition
Yandong Wen1 , Kaipeng Zhang1 , Zhifeng Li1? and Yu Qiao1,2
1

Shenzhen Key Lab of Comp. Vis. & Pat. Rec.,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS, China
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
yandongw@andrew.cmu.edu, {kp.zhang, zhifeng.li, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely
used in computer vision community, significantly improving the stateof-the-art. In most of the available CNNs, the softmax loss function is
used as the supervision signal to train the deep model. In order to enhance the discriminative power of the deeply learned features, this paper
proposes a new supervision signal, called center loss, for face recognition
task. Specifically, the center loss simultaneously learns a center for deep
features of each class and penalizes the distances between the deep features and their corresponding class centers. More importantly, we prove
that the proposed center loss function is trainable and easy to optimize
in the CNNs. With the joint supervision of softmax loss and center loss,
we can train a robust CNNs to obtain the deep features with the two key
learning objectives, inter-class dispension and intra-class compactness as
much as possible, which are very essential to face recognition. It is encouraging to see that our CNNs (with such joint supervision) achieve the
state-of-the-art accuracy on several important face recognition benchmarks, Labeled Faces in the Wild (LFW), YouTube Faces (YTF), and
MegaFace Challenge. Especially, our new approach achieves the best results on MegaFace (the largest public domain face benchmark) under the
protocol of small training set (contains under 500000 images and under
20000 persons), significantly improving the previous results and setting
new state-of-the-art for both face recognition and face verification tasks.
Keywords: Convolutional neural networks, face recognition, discriminative feature learning, center loss

1

Introduction

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved great success on vision
community, significantly improving the state of the art in classification problems,
such as object [18, 28, 33, 12, 11], scene [42, 41], action [3, 36, 16] and so on. It
mainly benefits from the large scale training data [8, 26] and the end-to-end
learning framework. The most commonly used CNNs perform feature learning
?

Corresponding author.

2

Yandong Wen, Kaipeng Zhang, Zhifeng Li and Yu Qiao

Input

Convolutional
Feature Learning

Deeply learned
Features

Predicted
Labels

Label
Prediction

Loss
Function

Classify

Face Images

Separable
Features

Discriminative
Features

Predicted Labels

Fig. 1. The typical framework of convolutional neural networks.

and label prediction, mapping the input data to deep features (the output of the
last hidden layer), then to the predicted labels, as shown in Figure 1.
In generic object, scene or action recognition, the classes of the possible
testing samples are within the training set, which is also referred to close-set
identification. Therefore, the predicted labels dominate the performance and
softmax loss is able to directly address the classification problems. In this way,
the label prediction (the last fully connected layer) acts like a linear classifier
and the deeply learned features are prone to be separable.
For face recognition task, the deeply learned features need to be not only
separable but also discriminative. Since it is impractical to pre-collect all the
possible testing identities for training, the label prediction in CNNs is not always applicable. The deeply learned features are required to be discriminative
and generalized enough for identifying new unseen classes without label prediction. Discriminative power characterizes features in both the compact intra-class
variations and separable inter-class differences, as shown in Figure 1. Discriminative features can be well-classified by nearest neighbor (NN) [7] or k-nearest
neighbor (k-NN) [9] algorithms, which do not necessarily depend on the label
prediction. However, the softmax loss only encourage the separability of features.
The resulting features are not sufficiently effective for face recognition.
Constructing highly efficient loss function for discriminative feature learning in CNNs is non-trivial. Because the stochastic gradient descent (SGD) [19]
optimizes the CNNs based on mini-batch, which can not reflect the global distribution of deep features very well. Due to the huge scale of training set, it is
impractical to input all the training samples in every iteration. As alternative
approaches, contrastive loss [10, 29] and triplet loss [27] respectively construct
loss functions for image pairs and triplet. However, compared to the image samples, the number of training pairs or triplets dramatically grows. It inevitably
results in slow convergence and instability. By carefully selecting the image pairs
or triplets, the problem may be partially alleviated. But it significantly increases
the computational complexity and the training procedure becomes inconvenient.
In this paper, we propose a new loss function, namely center loss, to efficiently enhance the discriminative power of the deeply learned features in neural

